The year is 1968. We're at the Olympic Games in
Mexico City. Dick Fosbury has just made a record-breaking high
jump, winning the gold medal and completely changing how future
athletes approach the high jump. But let's rewind and see
how critical thinking played a part in getting Fosbury here.
For years, high jumpers used a variety of techniques, all
of which allowed for the jumper to land on their
feet after clearing the bar. Athletes assumed that these were
the most optimal methods. But in high school, Fosbury tried
them and found himself getting below average results. So he
asked himself, "Hmm, how else could I jump over this
bar?" Instead of accepting the norm, he began experimenting and
came up with a new and different jumping method. He
would jump and rotate in the air so that he
went over the bar headfirst on his back. At the
time, he was laughed at and criticized for this new
method. It looked pretty silly and was so different from
the typical methods, but it worked due to some unexpected
benefits. It lowered Fosbury's center of gravity, actually placing it
below the bar even though he himself was jumping over
it. This allowed him to use less energy while increasing
his height. And by leaping backwards, he was reducing his
chances of knocking the bar off with his arms and
legs. Using this technique, Fosbury was jumping higher than anyone
else on his high school track team. He continued to
hone this method in college and moved on to qualify
for the Olympics. And so here we are, back in
1968, with Fosbury winning the Olympic gold medal. He took
a problem, not being able to jump particularly high, and
used critical thinking to come up with a solution, a
new way of jumping that greatly improved his results. To
this day, almost every high jumper uses this method, now
known as the Fosbury Flop. And so it just goes
to show how critical thinking can both raise the bar
and change the game.
GCF Global, creating opportunities for a better life.